feat(txt-registry)!: deprecate legacy txt-format (#5172)
kubernetes-sigs/external-dns: docs/registry/txt.md

The TXT registry is the default registry.
It stores DNS record metadata in TXT records, using the same provider.

> If you plan to manage apex domains with external-dns whilst using a txt registry, you should ensure when using --txt-prefix that you specify the record type substitution and that it ends in a period ., to ensure the record is created under the same domain as the apex record being managed, i.e. --txt-prefix=someprefix-%{record_type}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you plan to manage apex domains with external-dns whilst using a txt registry, you should ensure when using --txt-prefix that you specify the record type substitution and that it ends in a period (**.**). The record should be created under the same domain as the apex record being managed, i.e. --txt-prefix=someprefix-%{record_type}.
```

## Record Format Options

### For version `v0.16.2+`

The TXT registry supports single format for storing DNS record metadata:

- Creates a TXT record with record type information (e.g., 'a-' prefix for A records)

The TXT registry would try to guarantee a consistency in between providers and sources, if provider supports the behaviour

If you are dealing with APEX domains, example `example.com` and TXT records are failing to be created for managed record types specified by `--managed-record-types`, consider following options:

1. TXT record with prefix based on requirements. Example `--txt-prefix="%{record_type}-abc-"` or `--txt-prefix="%{record_type}.abc-"`
2. TXT record with suffix based on requirements. Example `--txt-suffix="-abc-%{record_type}"` or `--txt-suffix="-abc.%{record_type}."`

Example when configured `--txt-prefix="%{record_type}-abc-"` for apex domain `example.com` the expected result is

|             Name              |   TYPE   |
|:-----------------------------:|:--------:|
|   `a-abc-nginx-v2.ex.com.`    |  `TXT`   |

> | `cname-abc-nginx-v3.ex.com.`  | `CNAME`  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `nginx-v2.ex.com.`  | `CNAME`  |
```
The CNAME should be without the prefix, no ? Or did I miss something ?

And when configured `--txt-suffix="-abc.%{record_type}"` for apex domain `example.com` the expected result is

|             Name              |  TYPE   |
|:-----------------------------:|:-------:|
|   `nginx-v2-abc.a.ex.com.`    |  `TXT`  |

> | `nginx-v3-abc.cname.ex.com..` | `CNAME` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `nginx-v3.ex.com..` | `CNAME` |
```

The TXT registry is the default registry.
It stores DNS record metadata in TXT records, using the same provider.

If you plan to manage apex domains with external-dns whilst using a txt registry, you should ensure when using --txt-prefix that you specify the record type substitution and that it ends in a period (**.**). The record should be created under the same domain as the apex record being managed, i.e. --txt-prefix=someprefix-%{record_type}.

> Note: `--txt-prefix` and `--txt-suffix` contribute to the 63-byte maximum record length. To avoid errors, use them only if absolutely required and keep them as short as possible.

## Record Format Options

### For version `v0.16.2+`

The TXT registry supports single format for storing DNS record metadata:

- Creates a TXT record with record type information (e.g., 'a-' prefix for A records)

> The TXT registry would try to guarantee a consistency in between providers and sources, if provider supports the behaviour

Author: fixed

> If you are dealing with APEX domains, example `example.com` and TXT records are failing to be created for managed record types specified by `--managed-record-types`, consider following options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are dealing with APEX domains, like `example.com` and TXT records are failing to be created for managed record types specified by `--managed-record-types`, consider following options:
```

1. TXT record with prefix based on requirements. Example `--txt-prefix="%{record_type}-abc-"` or `--txt-prefix="%{record_type}.abc-"`
2. TXT record with suffix based on requirements. Example `--txt-suffix="-abc-%{record_type}"` or `--txt-suffix="-abc.%{record_type}."`

> Example if configured `--txt-prefix="%{record_type}-abc-"` for apex domain `ex.com` the expected result is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If configured `--txt-prefix="%{record_type}-abc-"` for apex domain `ex.com` the expected result is
```

> Example when configured `--txt-prefix="%{record_type}-abc-"` for apex domain `example.com` the expected result is

Reviewer 2: when -> if

Author: fixed

|              Name              |  TYPE   |
|:------------------------------:|:-------:|
| `cname-a-abc-nginx-v2.ex.com.` |  `TXT`  |
|       `nginx-v2.ex.com.`       | `CNAME` |

> And if configured `--txt-suffix="-abc.%{record_type}"` for apex domain `ex.com` the expected result is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If configured `--txt-suffix="-abc.%{record_type}"` for apex domain `ex.com` the expected result is
```

> And when configured `--txt-suffix="-abc.%{record_type}"` for apex domain `example.com` the expected result is

Reviewer 2: when -> if

Author: fixed

|              Name              |  TYPE   |
|:------------------------------:|:-------:|
| `cname-nginx-v2-abc.a.ex.com.` |  `TXT`  |

> |      `nginx-v3.ex.com..`       | `CNAME` |

Reviewer 2: There are two dots. Mistake or on purpose?

Author: Mistake, fixed

## Record Format Options

### For version `v0.16.2+`

The TXT registry supports single format for storing DNS record metadata:

- Creates a TXT record with record type information (e.g., 'a-' prefix for A records)

### Manually Cleanup Legacy TXT Records

> While deleting registry TXT records won't cause downtime, a well-thought-out migration and cleanup plan is crucial.

Occasionally, it may be necessary to remove outdated TXT records from your registry.

> The script could be found in [scripts/cleanup-legacy-txt-records.py](../../scripts/cleanup-legacy-txt-records.py) with instructions how to run it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An exaloke script can be found in [scripts/cleanup-legacy-txt-records.py](../../scripts/cleanup-legacy-txt-records.py) with instructions on how to run it.
```
